Topics: Introduction to the Course, Basic concepts about Matter, Measurements
=============================================================================

Introduction
--------------

This is going to be a very intense course.  We meet 4 times per week
for 3 hours per day.  The expectation is that you will be spending at
least 3-4 hours outside of class each day in reading, preparing
homework, studying, practicing, etc., and that you will be prepared
ahead of time for every class session.


In general, you should expect to see something like a quiz every class
session, and an exam once per week.  Class time will be split between
lecture, guided practice, formative assessment (activities that feel
like tests, but which are designed to help you learn while you show me
what you've already learned), self-reflection, and more.


My general approach to teaching is that it isn't about *me* -- it's
about you.  It's boring to watch someone else do chemistry, but it can
be very exciting to do chemistry yourself.  So most of our time will
be devoted to activities that force *you* to be doing something,
rather than watching me.  That said, a lot of organic chemistry
involves understanding and memorization of certain patterns of
reactions, certain properties of complex molecules, and how to give
*names* to them to make it easier for us to describe and use them.
Since a number of you are in the Nutrition program, the organic
portion of the course will be particularly useful for you in
understanding the chemical basis of many of the issues you consider
there.


But even more important than the practical application of organic
molecules in your other studies and in your careers is understanding
how a chemist/scientist *thinks*, how they approach understanding the
world, what kinds of questions they ask, how they deal with failure,
how they handle it when they don't have a clue what's going on --- so
that you can make use of some of those powerful tools yourself, in
situations where you will start with a feeling of hopelessness, but
still be able to figure out how to do it.


Measurement
-----------

From the Garoutte activity book, ChemActivity 1:

Develop the POGIL setup and roles:  Manager, Presenter, Recorder, Strategist

Students are to determine how many ping-pong balls it will take to
fill the entire room.  They are given nothing -- they must ask for
anything that they believe they need.  If they want to measure, then
they should measure.  (Q?:  Do we have rulers? Micrometers? Calipers?)

The goal of this first activity is to acquaint students with the
process of the ChemActivities, and to the various roles they will
take: Manager, Presenter, Recorder, and Reflector.  I'll be providing
whiteboards and pens to each group, and taking snapshots of
interesting work as they progress.  

Extension can be made by estimating other measurements of the room,
and extrapolating small scale measurements to larger ones.  This
should encourage the use of scientific notation and significant
figures, as well as unit conversion.  I will also have them find the
weight of the classroom in water.

In particular, I'm looking for the ability to make symbolic and
abstract computations, and algebraic thinking.  If students seem
particularly weak in algebra, we will arrange extra practice.

Finally we'll do some rates of change calculations using video to get
them to estimate or determine a rate, and use it to compute time to
completion.


Basic Concepts About Matter 
--------------------------- 

ChemActivity 2  Types of changes

solid, liquid, gas, physical vs. chemical properties, physical
vs. chemical changes, pure substance, mixture, heterogeneous mixtures,
homogeneous mixtures, elements, compounds.

Q?  Are there simulations/demos I can use to demonstrate/explore some
of these concepts?




Follow-up with some physical examples of different kinds of mixtures
and compounds.

  Box of nuts and bolts
  Box of nuts and bolts, screwed together
  
How would you classify these?

How do we know about the elements?  How do we know if something is an
element or a compound?

Atoms, molecules, chemical formulas

 



[Homework #1](hw.md) is due at the beginning of class on Day 2.

Show them where the HW is on ulearn.
Show them where the wiki feature is on ulearn.
Show them how to submit their glossary entries for HW and for wiki.
Show them where to find assignments, syllabus, grades, etc.
